ID: W1970998089
TITLE: Global Habitat Suitability for Framework-Forming Cold-Water Corals
AUTHOR: ['Andrew J. Davies', 'John M. Guinotte']
ABSTRACT:
Predictive habitat models are increasingly being used by conservationists, researchers and governmental bodies to identify vulnerable ecosystems and species' distributions in areas that have not been sampled. However, in the deep sea, several limitations have restricted the widespread utilisation of this approach. These range from issues with the accuracy of species presences, the lack of reliable absence data and the limited spatial resolution of environmental factors known or thought to control deep-sea species' distributions. To address these problems, global habitat suitability models have been generated for five species of framework-forming scleractinian corals by taking the best available data and using a novel approach to generate high resolution maps of seafloor conditions. High-resolution global bathymetry was used to resample gridded data from sources such as World Ocean Atlas to produce continuous 30-arc second (∼1 km(2)) global grids for environmental, chemical and physical data of the world's oceans. The increased area and resolution of the environmental variables resulted in a greater number of coral presence records being incorporated into habitat models and higher accuracy of model predictions. The most important factors in determining cold-water coral habitat suitability were depth, temperature, aragonite saturation state and salinity. Model outputs indicated the majority of suitable coral habitat is likely to occur on the continental shelves and slopes of the Atlantic, South Pacific and Indian Oceans. The North Pacific has very little suitable scleractinian coral habitat. Numerous small scale features (i.e., seamounts), which have not been sampled or identified as having a high probability of supporting cold-water coral habitat were identified in all ocean basins. Field validation of newly identified areas is needed to determine the accuracy of model results, assess the utility of modelling efforts to identify vulnerable marine ecosystems for inclusion in future marine protected areas and reduce coral bycatch by commercial fisheries.

SOURCE: PloS one
PDF URL: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article/file?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0018483&type=printable
CITED BY COUNT: 300
PUBLICATION YEAR: 2011
TYPE: article
CONCEPTS: ['Habitat', 'Bathymetry', 'Coral', 'Seamount', 'Oceanography', 'Seafloor spreading', 'Environmental science', 'Environmental niche modelling', 'Marine habitats', 'Global change', 'Range (aeronautics)', 'Ecology', 'Ecosystem', 'Climate change', 'Geology', 'Biology', 'Ecological niche', 'Materials science', 'Composite material']
