ID: W254563665
TITLE: Environmental Effects of Marine Finfish Aquaculture
AUTHOR: []
ABSTRACT:
Fred H. Page, Randy Losier, Paul McCurdy, David Greenberg, Jason Chaffey, Blythe Chang: Dissolved oxygen and salmon cage culture in the southwestern New Brunswick portion of the Bay of Fundy.- P.M. Strain, B.T. Hargrave :Salmon aquaculture, nutrient fluxes and ecosystem processes in southwestern New Brunswick.- W. Glen Harrison, Tim Perry, William K.W. Li: Ecosystem indicators of water quality.- I. Plankton biomass, primary production and nutrient demand.- Paul E. Kepkay, W. Glen Harrison, John B.C. Bugden: Ecosystem indicators of water quality. II. Oxygen production and oxygen demand.- M. Robin Anderson, Michael F. Tlusty, Vern A. Pepper: Organic enrichment at cold water aquaculture sites - the case of coastal Newfoundland.- Michael F. Tlusty, Vern A. Pepper, M. Robin Anderson: Reconciling aquaculture's influence on the water column and benthos of an estuarine fjord - a case study from Bay d'Espoir, Newfoundland.- C.J. Cromey, K.D. Black: Modelling the impacts of finfish aquaculture.- Dario Stucchi, Terri-Ann Sutherland, Colin Levings, Dave Higgs: Near-field depositional model for salmon aquaculture waste.- Marianne Holmer, Dave Wildish, Barry Hargrave: Organic enrichment from marine finfish aquaculture and effects on sediment biogeochemical processes.- P.A. Yeats, T.G. Milligan, T.F. Sutherland, S.M.C. Robinson, J.A. Smith, P. Lawton, C.D. Levings: Lithium normalized zinc and copper concentrations in sediments as measures of trace metal enrichment due to salmon aquaculture.- John N. Smith, Phil Yeats, Timothy G. Milligan: Sediment geochronologies for fish farm contaminants in sediments from Lime Kiln Bay, Bay of Fundy.- T.G. Milligan, B.A. Law: The effect of marine aquaculture on fine sediment dynamics in coastal inlets.- S.M.C. Robinson, L.M. Auffrey, M.A. Barbeau: Far-field impacts of eutrophication on the intertidal zone in the Bay of Fundy, Canada with emphasis on the soft-shell clam, Mya arenaria.- D.J.Wildish, G.W.Pohle: Benthic macrofaunal changesresulting from finfish mariculture.- K. Haya, L. E. Burridge, I. M. Davies, A. Ervik: A review and assessment of environmental risk of chemicals used for the treatment of sea lice infestations of cultured salmon.- S. M. Armstrong, B.T. Hargrave, K. Haya: Antibiotic use in finfish aquaculture: modes of action, environmental fate, and microbial resistance.- John W. Sowles: Assessing nitrogen carrying capacity for Blue Hill Bay, Maine - a management case history.- Morten T. Schaanning, Pia Kupka Hansen: The suitability of electrode measurements for assessment of benthic organic impact and their use in a management system for marine fish farms.- James E. Stewart: Environmental management and the use of sentinel species.- Barry T. Hargrave, William Silvert, Paul D. Keizer: Assessing and managing environmental risks associated with marine finfish aquaculture.

SOURCE: ˜The œhandbook of environmental chemistry. Volume 5
PDF URL: None
CITED BY COUNT: 79
PUBLICATION YEAR: 2005
TYPE: book
CONCEPTS: ['Aquaculture', 'Fishery', 'Environmental science', 'Fish <Actinopterygii>', 'Biology']
