ID: W2150244073
TITLE: A review of global ocean temperature observations: Implications for ocean heat content estimates and climate change
AUTHOR: ['John Abraham', 'Molly O. Baringer', 'Nathaniel L. Bindoff', 'Tim Boyer', 'Lijing Cheng', 'John A. Church', 'Jessica L. Conroy', 'Catia M. Domingues', 'John T. Fasullo', 'John Gilson', 'Gustavo Goñi', 'Simon Good', 'John Gorman', 'Viktor Gouretski', 'Masayoshi Ishii', 'Gregory C. Johnson', 'Shoichi Kizu', 'John M. Lyman', 'Alison M. Macdonald', 'W. J. Minkowycz', 'S. E. Moffitt', 'Matthew D. Palmer', 'Alberto R. Piola', 'Franco Reseghetti', 'Karina von Schuckmann', 'Kevin E. Trenberth', 'I. Velicogna', 'Josh Willis']
ABSTRACT:
Abstract The evolution of ocean temperature measurement systems is presented with a focus on the development and accuracy of two critical devices in use today (expendable bathythermographs and conductivity‐temperature‐depth instruments used on Argo floats). A detailed discussion of the accuracy of these devices and a projection of the future of ocean temperature measurements are provided. The accuracy of ocean temperature measurements is discussed in detail in the context of ocean heat content, Earth's energy imbalance, and thermosteric sea level rise. Up‐to‐date estimates are provided for these three important quantities. The total energy imbalance at the top of atmosphere is best assessed by taking an inventory of changes in energy storage. The main storage is in the ocean, the latest values of which are presented. Furthermore, despite differences in measurement methods and analysis techniques, multiple studies show that there has been a multidecadal increase in the heat content of both the upper and deep ocean regions, which reflects the impact of anthropogenic warming. With respect to sea level rise, mutually reinforcing information from tide gauges and radar altimetry shows that presently, sea level is rising at approximately 3 mm yr −1 with contributions from both thermal expansion and mass accumulation from ice melt. The latest data for thermal expansion sea level rise are included here and analyzed.

SOURCE: Reviews of geophysics
PDF URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/rog.20022
CITED BY COUNT: 375
PUBLICATION YEAR: 2013
TYPE: review
CONCEPTS: ['Ocean heat content', 'Argo', 'Environmental science', 'Effects of global warming on oceans', 'Context (archaeology)', 'Ocean observations', 'Climate change', 'Climatology', 'Altimeter', 'Global warming', 'Sea surface temperature', 'Oceanography', 'Meteorology', 'Geology', 'Geography', 'Paleontology']
