ID: W3033306016
TITLE: The Tropical Atlantic Observing System
AUTHOR: ['Gregory R. Foltz', 'Peter Brandt', 'Ingo Richter', 'Belén Rodríguez‐Fonseca', 'Fabrice Hernández', 'Marcus Dengler', 'Regina R. Rodrigues', 'Jörn O. Schmidt', 'Lisan Yu', 'Nathalie Lefèvre', 'Letícia Cotrim da Cunha', 'Michael J. McPhaden', 'Moacyr Araújo', 'Johannes Karstensen', 'Johannes Hahn', 'Marta Martín‐Rey', 'Christina M. Patricola', 'Paul Poli', 'Paquita Zuidema', 'Rebecca Hummels', 'Renellys C. Perez', 'Vanessa Hatje', 'Joke F. Lübbecke', 'Irene Polo', 'Rick Lumpkin', 'Didier Bourles', 'Francis E. Asuquo', 'Patrick Lehodey', 'Anna Conchon', 'Ping Chang', 'Philippe Dandin', 'Claudia Schmid', 'Adrienne J. Sutton', 'Hervé Giordani', 'Yan Xue', 'Séréna Illig', 'Teresa Losada', 'Semyon A. Grodsky', 'Florent Gasparin', 'Tong Lee', 'Elsa Mohíno', 'Paulo Nobre', 'Rik Wanninkhof', 'Noel Keenlyside', 'Véronique Garçon', 'Emilia Sánchez-Gómez', 'Hyacinth C. Nnamchi', 'Marie Drévillon', 'Andrea Storto', 'Elisabeth Rémy', 'Alban Lazar', 'Sabrina Speich', 'Marlos Góes', 'Tarquin Dorrington', 'William E. Johns', 'J.N. Moum', 'Carol Robinson', 'Coralie Perruche', 'Ronald Buss de Souza', 'Amadou Thierno Gaye', 'Jorge López‐Parages', 'Paul‐Arthur Monerie', 'Paola Castellanos', 'Nsikak U. Benson', 'Mahouton Norbert Hounkonnou', 'Janice T. Duha', 'Rémi Laxenaire', 'Nicolás Reul']
ABSTRACT:
The tropical Atlantic is home to multiple coupled climate variations covering a wide range of timescales and impacting societally relevant phenomena such as continental rainfall, Atlantic hurricane activity, oceanic biological productivity, and atmospheric circulation in the equatorial Pacific. The tropical Atlantic also connects the southern and northern branches of the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation and receives freshwater input from some of the world’s largest rivers. To address these diverse, unique, and interconnected research challenges, a rich network of ocean observations has developed, building on the backbone of the Prediction and Research Moored Array in the Tropical Atlantic (PIRATA). This network has evolved naturally over time and out of necessity in order to address the most important outstanding scientific questions and to improve predictions of tropical Atlantic severe weather and global climate variability and change. The tropical Atlantic observing system is motivated by goals to understand and better predict phenomena such as tropical Atlantic interannual to decadal variability and climate change; multidecadal variability and its links to the meridional overturning circulation; air-sea fluxes of CO2 and their implications for the fate of anthropogenic CO2; the Amazon River plume and its interactions with biogeochemistry, vertical mixing, and hurricanes; the highly productive eastern boundary and equatorial upwelling systems; and oceanic oxygen minimum zones, their impacts on biogeochemical cycles and marine ecosystems, and their feedbacks to climate. Past success of the tropical Atlantic observing system is the result of an international commitment to sustained observations and scientific cooperation, a willingness to evolve with changing research and monitoring needs, and a desire to share data openly with the scientific community and operational centers. The observing system must continue to evolve in order to meet an expanding set of research priorities and operational challenges. This paper discusses the tropical Atlantic observing system, including emerging scientific questions that demand sustained ocean observations, the potential for further integration of the observing system, and the requirements for sustaining and enhancing the tropical Atlantic observing system.

SOURCE: Frontiers in marine science
PDF URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmars.2019.00206/pdf
CITED BY COUNT: 105
PUBLICATION YEAR: 2019
TYPE: article
CONCEPTS: ['Tropical Atlantic', 'Atlantic hurricane', 'Upwelling', 'Climatology', 'Oceanography', 'Atlantic Equatorial mode', 'Ocean observations', 'Environmental science', 'Atlantic multidecadal oscillation', 'Amazon rainforest', 'Climate change', 'North Atlantic Deep Water', 'Tropical cyclone', 'Thermohaline circulation', 'Sea surface temperature', 'Geology', 'Ecology', 'Biology']
