ID: W2094785904
TITLE: Accelerating loss of seagrasses across the globe threatens coastal ecosystems
AUTHOR: ['Michelle Waycott', 'Carlos M. Duarte', 'Tim J. B. Carruthers', 'Robert J. Orth', 'William C. Dennison', 'Suzanne Olyarnik', 'Ainsley Calladine', 'James W. Fourqurean', 'Kenneth L. Heck', 'A. Randall Hughes', 'Gary A. Kendrick', 'W. J. Kenworthy', 'Frederick T. Short', 'Susan L. Williams']
ABSTRACT:
Coastal ecosystems and the services they provide are adversely affected by a wide variety of human activities. In particular, seagrass meadows are negatively affected by impacts accruing from the billion or more people who live within 50 km of them. Seagrass meadows provide important ecosystem services, including an estimated $1.9 trillion per year in the form of nutrient cycling; an order of magnitude enhancement of coral reef fish productivity; a habitat for thousands of fish, bird, and invertebrate species; and a major food source for endangered dugong, manatee, and green turtle. Although individual impacts from coastal development, degraded water quality, and climate change have been documented, there has been no quantitative global assessment of seagrass loss until now. Our comprehensive global assessment of 215 studies found that seagrasses have been disappearing at a rate of 110 km(2) yr(-1) since 1980 and that 29% of the known areal extent has disappeared since seagrass areas were initially recorded in 1879. Furthermore, rates of decline have accelerated from a median of 0.9% yr(-1) before 1940 to 7% yr(-1) since 1990. Seagrass loss rates are comparable to those reported for mangroves, coral reefs, and tropical rainforests and place seagrass meadows among the most threatened ecosystems on earth.

SOURCE: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
PDF URL: None
CITED BY COUNT: 3075
PUBLICATION YEAR: 2009
TYPE: article
CONCEPTS: ['Seagrass', 'Coral reef', 'Ecosystem', 'Threatened species', 'Blue carbon', 'Environmental science', 'Fishery', 'Mangrove', 'Habitat', 'Marine habitats', 'Marine ecosystem', 'Endangered species', 'Ecosystem services', 'Habitat destruction', 'Ecology', 'Reef', 'Kelp forest', 'Fishing', 'Geography', 'Biology']
